>> Scott Moss: A headless CMS,
I think it's a silly name.
[LAUGH] I don't know why we call it that,
but I get it.
A headless CMS is basically a CMS
that doesn't build your website,
although most headless CMSs
want to build your website now.
Traditional CMSs manage your content for
you or allow you to manage your
content admin interface where
you're basically filling out forms.
Some of the more sophisticated ones will
allow you to visually edit you're talking
like full blown site builders
the squarespaces of the world and
things like that.
And then the other part is actually
building your website, right?
So there's like themes you can install,
you can use their custom language,
on Shopify, it's like liquid.
On Squarespace, it's, I don't know,
on WordPress, it's Php.
You can use their language and
actually build a site.
A headless CMS is just half of that.
It's just saying, all right,
we'll let you manage your content and
we'll deliver it over an API.
So that's the best way I can describe it.
So why headless CMS is a thing
now when it's only half
of what most CMS have always been.
Well, I think it initially started
because around some time in the 2018s,
JavaScript or Google was easily able to
index JavaScript based websites, right?
Before that,
you have people remember this, but
if you had like a single page app, you
had to use a service like pre render to.
If you detected a Google bot crawling your
website, you send them back a pre rendered
version of that website that you use
the service to actually pre render,
because it really wasn't good at
indexing JavaScript based websites, but
at some point it did get good.
And it was, yeah, we don't care if
you have JavaScript, we'll run that.
And then that was the change.
That's when people were, well,
we can finally build SEO-friendly
static websites with JavaScript.
Let's just do that.
And you went from having
these server side or
these template languages
like handlebars or EJS.
To like, CS, whatever thing
you want on the front end, and
that's totally fine, right?
So I think that's what happened and
that became a better experience to
build static SEO friendly websites and
whatever proprietary or outdated
technologies that you had to use before.
So now that people are building websites
and their favorite JavaScript framework,
and there's more frameworks to
be released every single day, so
the love is getting bigger.
How do you manage your content?
You still have people on your
team who aren't technical.
You still have people on your team
that need to run experiments and
manage some of the content.
And you also still don't wanna do it.
So how does that work?
So that's where headless
CMS has come from, right?
They came from that need and
at least that's kind of where I
saw it are in the early days.
And since then,
they've evolved, they're now moving
back towards traditional health.
Traditional CMS is where you can download
or build a whole site and a headless CMS,
and we'll actually do some of that
you'll see what I'm talking about.
Look at this point where it kind of
feels like you're just making a site,
which can be good or bad.
It really just depends on your
relationship with the non-technical people
on your team and
how much power you've given them.
There's a dynamic with headless CMSs on
who has the most power, who can do things.
Do you want them to be able,
is this dynamic?
Is this not dynamic?
You can let someone change the theme on
the website if you want through a CMS or
the colors, but should you?
I don't know, right?
So it really just depends on
how much power you give them.
Let's talk about some of the headless
CMSs out there and the different types.
And then which one we're gonna
be using and why I chose it.
So there's two types of headless CMS
is although like a third type is
like emerging and
we'll kind of talk about that.
There's got to be like the open source and
the closed source basically, right?
So the open source ones you have things
like the sanity IEOs of the world.
The way these work, there's this
weird problem that most headless
CMS companies have to figure out is
like who are we marketing towards
to because a headless CMS cannot
be used by just a content team.
It's a product that has to be integrated
by engineers, but the engineers aren't
the ones typically editing the content,
but they have to do the integration.
So it's like this chicken or
the egg problem of like, all right,
are we marketing to developers so they can
integrate or are you marketing to content
people so they can ask their
developers to integrate?
So on a lot of headless CMS websites,
you'll see things like for
developers, click here for marketers,
click here for product people,
click here, right, and
I do things like that.
Because it's used by a lot of people.
These open source headless CMS is
are kind of just double down on developer
experience, right?
They're just like if we make
the best developer experience,
developers won't feel like
it's a chore to set this up.
And therefore they're not
technical folks and their team,
we'll get really good value a lot faster,
so that's the whole point of like
the open source headless CMS is that's
the approach that they're doing.
Sanity's probably one of the leading
open source headless CMS out there
in my opinion I don't know if it's
the best, I haven't used it in like years.
I'm actually not a fan of their UI, I just
cannot get over how basic that UI is.
But, it works.
But yeah, this one's open source.
You would have to download Saturday on
your computer, run it just like a regular
app and then you talk to it and then you
gotta host it and do things like that.
We're not gonna do that today,
although I do think the developer
experience is better.
It's just a lot more work.
So I don't wanna have to host that and
then deploy our app and do all this stuff.
But if you want like a superior developer
experience where you can reuse components
from your app and also in your headless
CMS, so your non-technical folks or
your content creators can actually
use those components too.
You probably want something open source.
Here's another one.
I see.
I forgot what it's called.
Let me see typescripts headless CMS,
payload.
It's called payload.
This was relatively new but
I kind of like what they're doing.
Payloads also open source one.
They work very well with a lot
of the frameworks is out there,
they have a good aesthetic if you like,
design is your sweet spot.
So this is also a really good one but
I would say the leading open source one
iIthink is probably still strappy maybe,
although at this point I cannot
confidently say that
it's just a headless CMS.
At this point it's a back-end as
a service literally does everything,
it's not just a CMS, but
because it can do everything.
You can use it as a CMS.
To me it's like an overkill.
It's like shooting a roach with a bazooka.
It's just more than you'll
ever need at this point.
But it works really good and
people speak very highly of it.
I haven't used it since they first came
out in early 2015 even before then, so
I can't tell you how it is now I just
heard really good things about it, so
I think they're still like
the leading open source one.
Again, these open source ones
focus on developer experience.
I think strappy also put a really good
emphasis on user experience as far as
the UI, so there's a great content
editing experience as well.
So whereas a lot of the open source ones
don't really have an editing experience,
catered towards non technical people,
they're like,
still catered toward developers.
So it's like, who's really making
the content here, the developers or
the non technical folks.
So we got that.
So those are open source, closed source.
There are so many of them.
There's like a new one every single day.
I don't really have any opinions
on like which one's the best or
if this one's better than that one.
I've just, the ones that I've tried
are the ones that I've used over time.
So I'll just talk about some of them.
I think the OG OG one is contentful.
That's probably one of the first
headless CMSs out there.
Well, other than like the enterprise
ones that have been doing it for
way much longer than contentful has.
This one's pretty cool, I guess.
It's like the McDonald's of headless CMS.
So, it's just everywhere.
But if you want something,
you're not gonna go there to get Wagyu.
So [LAUGH] it's pretty good, I guess.
I've used it many times, very simple.
I think they simplified it a lot, but
they definitely cater
towards more enterprise now.
And as you can see, a lot of CMSs
are starting to talk about AI, this, and
AI that, which is very interesting because
I do think CMSs have a great surface
in which you can apply AI to, so
you can do some really cool stuff.
So I think it's a great app.
I haven't tried any of the AI features,
but I bet they're pretty cool.
So I would say Contentful
is probably a good one.
I mean, I could talk, about other ones,
there's so many of ' out there.
You have Prismic, you have butter CMS,
you have Sitecore, you have,
there's a lot, there's so many of them
out there I can't even Adobe has one too.
It's like Adobe Experience Manager.
There's a lot of them, so
it's overwhelming when it comes to
deciding which one you wanna pick.
Now when it comes to which one we're
gonna pick, we're gonna pick it sinful.
The reason I pick in sinful is really
just three reasons one, it's free,
a lot of them are free, but this one is
free and it's been free for a long time.
Two, out of all the ones that I've
had experience with this is the one I
have the most experience with so
I feel more comfortable teaching it.
And then three, because they actually
don't support the latest version of
Next.js, it actually works out for
us because we get to build like our own
custom integration from scratch, which
means we can do whatever the hell we want.
Whereas all the other ones either support
it, they support the latest version of
Next.js, but they abstracted away so much
that you were not gonna learn anything.
So I was like, I don't really want
to do that, because you're not,
really gonna know what's going on here.
You're not gonna know that, this is
how you turn on previews and Next.js,
because it's doing it for you.
And I think it's just too specific.
I wanted something that was literally
just an HTTP call and that was it.
So that way we are not bound to this
is how you do this in contentful and
it only works here.
So I wanted it to be extremely generic,
and it doesn't get more generic than this.
Like I said,
it's the McDonald's of headless CMSs.
So that's why it shows them, but
I wouldn't say that they're the best.
There's definitely a lot of better
products out there in my opinion.
So we're gonna be doing that.
So with that being said,
go to contemplate.com, sign up,
you can create an account, it's free.
I'm I already have one,
so I'm gonna log in.
Once you create an account,
they're gonna have you go through and
make something called spaces.
You can roughly associate
spaces with websites, I guess.
A space is like a website or
you can think of it as a database.
This is a database.
This is a website.
This is a project,
however you wanna correlate that.
But just make a space.
I have a space here.
Mine already has content in it.
I'm most likely gonna delete it all so
we can do it from scratch together.
But, yeah, make a space.
I don't really need to walk you through
all this stuff, because we're gonna do it
together when we start modeling content,
and it's honestly really simple.
It's a UI for a database.
At the end of the day,
a CMS is a UI for a database.
It's a form builder for a database,
the only caveat is everybody
has a different schema, right?
It's like you allow someone
to model a schema and
all their schemas are different.
So that's where it starts to get pretty
difficult as far as on the implementation
side, if you're making a headless CMS.
But at the end of the day,
it's a UI for a database, so.
Is contentful for you for
commercial purposes, or?
Yes, contentful is free for no matter what
you do with it up to a certain limit.
I mean, you could look at their pricing.
Let's go look at it.
Let's go see.
I'll make sure, I am accurate with that.
Looks like they have a free forever for
developers and
marketers building individual projects.
So yeah, looks like you can
do whatever you want with it.
You have the same license.
You're just limited in capacity and
users and things like that.
But for our purpose,
we won't even approach these limits,
when building today.
So not a big deal, but as you can
tell they are focused on enterprise,
it goes from here to here.
It's a call us real quick.
[LAUGH] Escalated really quick.
So they mostly just focused on enterprise,
so
they don't really care about this, right?
So it's not really bothering them.